Before we go into
details of each of these M's that are relevant to designing a
communications campaign. I think it'll be
worthwhile to look at a few key trends specially
on the media side. I think most of us
know that despite the changes in the
industry in terms of various media available to us, TV viewing is still covering a largest
part of the audience, followed by radio
then internet usage. But in terms of
frequency if you look at the data there are
a lot of changes. Overall spend in terms of time people spend on various
media that is changing. Television is going down, some of the digital
media is increasing. I think that's very consistent
with our intuition. But it's not like TV
is falling apart. TV is still and it's
projected to be at least one third of total ad spending
will be on television. Much of it will shift to digital and newspapers have
gone down quite a bit. Radio is still stable, but not as big. Out-of-home is what we
call as billboards and so on that remains
a pretty strong. It's not going to go away. If you look at the overall trends what you will see is
digital going up. Now this is often
very misleading. The reason it's very misleading is digital if you
really look at it. Digital is also looking
more and more like TV. Much of digital advertising and content on digital
is really videos. So it's only the method of
distribution has changed, the content looks
exactly like TV. So instead of you watching
your regular TV channel, you want to watch YouTube. But even if you look
at our own websites of companies our own website
at the Wharton school. Most of our messaging
is video-based. So really I think it's important to understand that even
though digital is going up, the content which
is video content is actually probably increasing
as a percentage of total. Only part of it gets delivered
through the television. The rest of it is getting delivered through digital means. So I think people
often say the media is changing therefore you are
strategies should change. I think what we want to emphasize here is the key principles of campaign design are
not affected by media choice or
media availability. It's actually the
other way round. Media choice is determined by campaign design rather than media affecting campaign design. So first we are to design
the campaign properly then select the media rather
than the other way round. So with that in mind
let's start with the first key m of a communications campaign which is figuring out the mission. What we know from
buyer behavior and consumer psychology is
that a consumer does not go from being a non buyer
to a buyer in a 0-1 manner that is certainly they don't like something and
they go ahead and buy, they go through certain stages. They go through stages such as, becoming aware of the
product or a service, then generating some interest about the product or service, next having some desire to
either buy or consume it, and finally deciding to buy it. What do we know from
research on how we influence buyer
behavior in our favor? What we know is that, if you look at
through these stages carefully things such as mass media which could be
either digital or others. They are very good at
creating awareness, but not as effective at the latter stages of
the persuasion process. Correspondingly, things
like word and mouth and interpersonal word-of-mouth or personal sources
and personal selling. These are much less effective at the early stages of the
decision-making process, but become much more effective at the later stages of the
decision-making process. What does that say about improving our
communications campaign? What it says is very simply that if you had $100 to spend, you would not spend all
$100 on mass media. You would spend a good part on that to improve
awareness and interest, but then you'd also
spent a good portion on personal and
interpersonal sources to create more word of mouth. This is often referred to as the 1-2 punch theory
of persuasion. Where does the phrase
1-2 punch comes from? It comes from boxing. What does that really
mean in this context? What it means is, you use mass media to soften your consumer make them familiar with their
products and services, get them interested and then use either personal selling or interpersonal
word-of-mouth to actually convert them to your users. If you try to use personal
selling at the very beginning, it's not going to
be very effective. Same way if you are going to
use mass media or digital at the latter stages of the
decision-making process it's also not going
to be very effective. So one of the key lessons
in determining and designing a communications
campaign is to make sure you have a good
mix of these sources both mass media as well as personal and interpersonal
communications. Now let's focus a little
bit on message design. This is a key component of
a communication strategies. How do you say what
you need to say? Psychologists and advertisers
have learned over the years that
there are two types of appeals we focus on. One is what we call
as rational appeals. They appeal to one
side of your brain. Others is what we call
as emotional appeals, and for each one of them there
are many different types, and we'll discuss a few
of each in this module. Let's think of first
rational appeals, a very popular and
powerful rational appeal is what we call as
product demonstration. What do we mean by
product demonstration? There are many
products and services where we want to
let the consumer or our buyers know that they deliver a particular point
of difference or deliver a particular
value proposition. But that claim is not
very easy to believe. People may not believe why this particular shaving system does give you a better
shave than another one. One way to communicate that is to show the technology
behind your product. So if you look at
this particular ad, you see there are four
pictures in the add. One picture shows a person
actually using the shaver. Then there are three
other pictures. The one picture right under the main picture is what is
demonstrating the technology, it's showing how this
particular shaving method will actually give
you a better shave. This is what we mean by
product demonstration, it's not demonstrating
the product on your face, but it's demonstrating how this technology will deliver
what it claims to deliver. Let's look at another
popular example that you may have seen. If you see vacuum cleaner
ads or washing machine ads. They'll often focus on the technology in
the vacuum cleaner or the washing machine. Dyson is a popular company
that makes vacuum cleaners. If you look at any of their ads which you can see on YouTube, you will see they often
talk about the technology. Why will this vacuum cleaner work better than other
vacuum cleaners? And this is what we call as the user product demonstration. In your communications campaign it's a very strong
rational appeal. Another type of rational appeal
is use our spokesperson. Spokespersons if they use a product that you believe
they do well with the product. You may also feel that you
will also be like them. Again the use of a spokesperson at times is very expensive, so you have to select your
spokesperson very carefully, otherwise it can be not a
good value proposition. Some companies often
use another type of a spokesperson which is
a cartoon character or an inanimate object and they use this cartoon character or other cartoon characters
like that as a spokesperson. Different than a spokesperson is the use of a testimonial. This comes from a regular
user who then say's, "Look, I use the product, I feel good about it. You should also do the same." Testimonials many people believe are more effective because
they are coming from regular users and these
regular users are not being paid to say something
good about the product. They are doing it because they themselves find the product
or the service useful. Another strong
rational appeal that advertisers use is
product comparison. They might compare their product against another
product on a number of characteristics or
holistically say more people prefer our
product to somebody else. Whenever you use product comparisons it's
very important that you follow the legal guidelines
for product comparison. Most countries have very strong
guidelines put in place. Some countries actually do not allow direct product comparisons, but those that do have strong legal requirements and you must follow those if you
use product comparisons. If done well this is a very
strong rational appeal. Emotional appeals are
another popular way of communicating your message and there are different types of emotional appeals that we
use proudly classified as positive emotions
or negative emotions. Positive emotions here are many examples of
positive emotions that advertisers use as
their developer campaign. A good example of that is the
Proctor and Gamble campaign for Olympics you see
children growing up their mothers taking care of them and as the children
grow up there you see them in playing or participating in one of the Olympic Games
doing very well, and then you see the child
actually hugging the mother. Anytime you see this ad no matter how many times you see it, at least whenever I see it I
still have a tear in my eye. What is interesting about
this campaign is when it was developed Procter and Gamble managers were not very
excited about it. Why? Because it didn't
sell the product itself. It only sold the company's name. So this is also an
example of what we call as corporate
image advertising. There are good studies done including something we
did many years ago along with one of my doctoral students on what type of company should use corporate advertising and what type of company should not. The general theme there was companies that use a common
brand name across many of their products should use corporate advertising
and those that use different brand
names or a house of brands so to say versus
a branded house. As Professor Barbara Kahn
mentioned in her module. Wherever you have a
branded house there is a stronger case for using corporate advertising and
Procter and Gamble it turns out does not use a branded house. It uses a house of brands. Another strong
emotion that we use in developing a communications
campaign is fear. That is one of the
negative emotions we use. What is interesting
about fear is we haves found that too little fear does not have much effect. Too much fear also in a campaign does not
have much effect. So the efficiency of fear is goes down if there
is too much of it. So a question can be asked is why too much fear is
not good in a campaign? What advertisers have
found is that if you use too much fear in your advertising
people get turned off. In fact they don't even
remember seeing the ad. So it's very important
that if you use fear in a mass media
kind of a setting, you have moderate levels
of fear in your campaign. That's what researchers
say in their work. One way to moderate the effect of fear is to combine it with humor, and there are many examples of that when you look at many of the pharmaceutical company
ads here is one example, where you have germs, but we never show
germs as real germs we'll show them as nice-looking
cartoon characters. So at least there is fear, but it's moderated
by using humor. Next m, we talk very briefly
about is media planning.