As I mentioned earlier at the
beginning of this module, media planning is
one of the key M's, but given our constraints, we are not going to spend
too much time on it, but I do want to give some
important messages here. There are three types of media when you look at it from
a strategic perspective. If you look at it from
a tactical perspective, people can say media consists
of newspapers, TV, digital. But when you look at it from
a strategic perspective, we classify media into
three types: paid media, earned media, and owned media. So any communication
campaign has to decide how much emphasis to put on paid, earned, and owned. What do we mean by paid media? Paid media is what
we know typically. It's your television. It's your search advertising. It's your banner advertising. It could be videos on YouTube, on your own website to. So that'll be paid media. Earned media is what you earn based on what
activities you do. So this could be actually
you conduct an event. You may sponsor a golf tournament or a tennis tournament and
then people talk about it, or you might have
a campaign where you give out free glasses to people who can't
afford it or free shoes to people who
can't afford it, and then news media
talks about it, all of that we'll
call as earned media. Then there is owned media. Owned media is your own website, your own companies building, your name on it. If it's at a very
popular location, people drive by it. But owned is also
your own product. Your product advertises itself. If you look at a typical car, the name of the car is
written on the back of the car not the
front of the car. Well, why is it written
on the back of the car? Well, people who are driving behind you can read the name. If it were written on
the front of the car, then you'll see it in
your rear-view mirror, you wouldn't be able to read it. So owned media is not
just your own website, but also your products and
services advertising itself. I think a good important
strategic choice in media is how much emphasis will be paid on paid media versus earned
media versus owned media. Once you've done that,
of course then there is the next step of the
media planning process. Who are you targeting? What media channels
you are using? There you're going
to spend your money. Then you're going to
spend your money. How much you are going to spend. All of these are technical decisions that if you have a good
advertising agency, they can help you
make these decisions. So this is not an area
where a typical person who's taking their own
product or service to the market needs
to specialize in. If your advertising agency
doesn't know how to do this, please find another one. But this is an area
where the skill sets are strong and you should
take advantage of that. Money, the next term. Once again, there are many formal methods
of deciding budgets. Here, we'll just give
you some key insights. Many companies when
they're setting up their communications budget use heuristics or rules
of thumbs such as, "Let's set our budget as
a percentage of sales or let's set a budget to match or do a little bit better
than competition." All these are, as the name
suggests, heuristics. They are not very good ways, because they are not
very purposeful. What you should be
doing is what we call as use Objectives
and Tasks methods. Think of what the end goal of your communications campaign is. For example, the male campaign had a very specific goal in mind. We would like to have
these money people aware of our product
in these many months. You start with that
end objective in mind and then work backwards
from there and ask yourself how much money you need to spend to get
to that objective. That's how you set a budget
as opposed to percentage of sales or matching or doing something better
than the competition. Advertising agencies might
encourage you to set a budget that is percentage of sales so that when your sales grows, the budget grows and
when the budget grows, their fees may also grow. So you need to be very
sensitive to that. So always use Objectives and Tasks method which is started
with the end goal in mind, and then work backwards as to
how much you need to spin, and there are formal
ways to do that. Now let's talk about the last
one, which is measurement. Now, measurement
is the last term, but I always say, don't decide it last. You should decide it early on. In fact, before you spend
a dime on communications, decide what measurement
method you are going to use. There is no dearth of
measurement methods. We have methods that cover
many different areas. We can test creative strategy, we can test print advertising, we can test television
advertising, we have fancy methods that
are physiological methods, we can look at consumers
skin responses, we can look at
their eye tracking, we can do their brain testing, we can conduct cross-market tests for digital we have
Google Analytics. So there is no dearth of
these measurement methods. The problem often is it's the [inaudible]
and willingness to measure that prevents
measurement, and it's not even the
cost of measurement. For a dollar that you
spend on communication, even the most
sophisticated method does not cost more than
$0.01 on the dollar. So please decide on what the
mission of your campaign is, set the measurement
method in advance, and then go ahead and develop your campaign and execute it. Finally, when it comes to
communication strategy, I think a good idea
is to keep it simple. Your advertising agency may be more interested
in winning awards, but your job is to improve the sales of your
products and services. Oftentimes winning awards is not correlated
marketplace outcomes. A very nice ad that I would like you all to
see is the Meow Mix Ad. Once you see it,
it's on you-tube. Anyone can go see it. It's very simply a cat
saying meow meow meow meow, I think more than 60
times in 30 seconds. Under that ad, you see
the line which says, "What is good about
this product?" It's a very simple execution, it is one of the
most memorable ads. The day after recall of this
ad has rarely been beaten. The cost of the spokesperson
is nothing. It's a cat. What are some of
the key principles in this particular ad? The company shows the product, mentions the brand
name many many times. Many of the
advertisements you see, whether it's on digital or TV, you've seen the whole ad and then at the very end you
see the brand name. By that time, many
people have walked out, engaged in something different. This particular Ad mentions the brand name many many times. It states all the positives
about the product. It shows the product in use, a voids any unpleasant
connection with your product, and it also tells people where
and how they can buy it. It's never won any awards, but the day after
recall of this ad in terms of people's recall
of the brand name, has been one of the highest. So a quick summary of what
we covered in this module: Align your communication
strategy with your positioning and
all the elements of your marketing mix. A great communication campaign is a key element of
your marketing plan, but it is not all of it. Once in a while, it may
help you sell what you can make but it will do wonders if you make
what you can sell. Again, define mission
and metrics before spending even a penny on your advertising and
communications strategy. So even though measurement is the last term you should
be designed in deciding it along with your
mission and not execute your advertising
before you combine both the mission and
the measurement.