In this module, we will discuss
Pricing in more detail. All companies, all businesses have to
make a pricing decision. Pricing is one of
the four key Ps that Professor Khan discussed
earlier in her opening module. So first let's talk a little bit about the importance of pricing, and why pricing is a
key driver of profits. This study was done by
McKinsey many years ago and we replicated it
in our book Smart Pricing more recently using data from Wharto's which is
a Wharton Data Service. So what this study
does is it looks at the improvement
in your bottom line. If you were to change or improve
either your fixed costs, your sales volume, your
variable cost or your price. So think about it
as the following; let's say we were to look
at all S&P 500 companies in the US and create a combined income statement
of all 500 companies. So once we have that combined
income statement we say, "Okay if these companies were to lower their fixed
cost by one percent, what would happen to
their operating profits?" The answer is they will
improve by 2.3 percent. What if these companies could increase their sales
volume by one percent? What would we the response
on the bottom line? It will be little more
than three percent. What if these
companies could reduce their variable cost
by one percent, what would be the impact
on the bottom line? Well close to eight percent. What if these companies could improve their price
by one percent, what would be the impact
on the bottom line? The answer is close
to 11 percent. So if you look at all the levers or drivers that are
available to a manager, improving your pricing has the biggest impact
on the bottom line. We have known this for a while and many good managers have
known this for a while, but now you combine it with
the next piece of data. When it comes to
managers perceptions as to what they are
better informed about, what do they focus on? Well if you look at variable cost that's the highest
thing people focus on. Number two is fixed costs, number three is
comparative prices and then when you look at pricing, those numbers are much lower
than the first few numbers. So what does that mean? Even though people realize
that pricing is one of the most important drivers
the knowledge about how to use and execute on pricing is limited and
can be much better. I think this highlights the
importance of all of us learning a little bit more about pricing and becoming
better pricers. There's a very nice
Russian proverb that I often share with my
students in the class. "There are two kinds of
fools in any market. One who charges too much and the other who
charges too little." Now there are many ways to
interpret this proverb. One way to interpret this is, well everyone's a fool, because nobody can be charging
the exact right price. There's another way to
interpret this proverb which I think is a more
appropriate way. What it's really trying to say is that good pricing
is a balancing act. In order to achieve
the right balance, we need to be cognizant of a
number of different areas. We need to understand economics because pricing
is about economics. We also need to
understand psychology both consumer psychology as well as psychology of people who
made pricing decisions, because human beings
make pricing decisions and human beings respond
to pricing decisions. In this age and also
in any other age, the knowledge of statistics
is very important. You need to be able
to manage data, you need to be able
to analyze data. You need to have a
good understanding of operations research which means you need to learn how
to optimize given some data. These days you need some
basics about computer science, and you also more importantly need a lot of courage because good pricing decisions are not made by changing the price, they are made by changing the pricing strategy
in a company. Also a good pricing
requires common sense. So it's a combination of all these various areas that help us improve
our pricing decisions.