A key to making good
pricing decisions is understanding the concept of price sensitivity and
price elasticity. In this module, we'll focus on this particular aspect
in more detail. We'll do it in two parts. In the first part
we'll think about, what drives price sensitivity
or price elasticity. In other words, under
what conditions are consumers more or
less price sensitive. If we know this, we get some useful
directional guidelines on when to price higher
and when to price lower. The next part of this
module we'll talk about formal methods of measuring price elasticity and of
course before we do that, we'll define formally what
price elasticity means. So let's start with the first one are drivers of price sensitivity. These are things we know from previous research and
previous observations and our fairly robust findings. So what are the things
we're going to focus on? We're going to focus on
seven different drivers of price sensitivity starting
with the availability and awareness of sub shoots
hence It's not very complicated to recognize that if your product has
more substitutes, people will be more
price sensitive. This is very straightforward
more substitutes that exist, greater will be the
price sensitivity. What is important is it's
not just the availability of substitutes even awareness
of substitutes matters. For example, I live
close to Philadelphia, I work in Philadelphia. So I know a lot of
restaurants in Philadelphia. If I'm pretty sensitive
about where to eat, I have good information
of various restaurants, there price, I'll be
more price sensitive. But if I go on a vacation, let's say I go on a
vacation to Paris or another city which I'm
not very familiar with, I don't know many restaurants there I'll be less
price sensitive. Probably there are
more restaurants in Paris than there
are in Philadelphia. So there are more substitutes
available in Paris, but my price sensitivity
in Paris is going to be lower because I'm not
aware of all of them. Another important
concept to keep in mind is it's not just
availability and awareness. How easy it is for us to make direct comparisons makes price sensitivity
higher or lower. Let me give you an example
from my own research. I do lot of work on private
labels at generics. [inaudible] talked
about private labels earlier also in her module. Private labels command
a very high share in the US market. Not just because they are priced lower than major national brands, but because they are
kept right next to major national brands
on the same shelf. So consumers can easily see
that national brand say, Tylenol cause this
much and as you know morphine produced by Walmart or sold under the Walmart name, costs much less and they are
kept right next to them. Many people choose
the store brand. Think of the following scenario, suppose all these store brands were put on a separate
shelf in the store, just like genetics were put on a separate show a shelf many
years ago in some stores. If all the private labels of various categories were taken out and put on a separate aisle in another
part of this store. One of our papers that we did for a company indicated
that the share of private labels will
fall by 10 percent. So it's not just the availability of private labels,it's
the ability to compare the private label price
with the National band in a very easy way that increases
our price sensitivity. Availability of substitutes, awareness of substitutes
and then how easy it is for us to compare the
price of one product against another and even small changes there make a big difference
in price sensitivity. Another important driver
of price sensitivity that we've observed is what is the total expenditure on the
product and also what is the total expenditure
on this product as a fraction of
your total costs? So let me give you
examples of both. If you spend more on a product or a service you're going to
be more price sensitive. Bigger families are more sensitive to the
price of groceries. Why? Because for a bigger family their expenditure on groceries is a bigger part of their budget. They are more price sensitive. So if you spend more
on a product or service here usually
more price sensitive. What is also interesting
is the same product. If it's a bigger part
of your cost structure, you'll be more price sensitive. But if it's a very small
part of your cost structure, you'll be less price sensitive. So let's say if I'm
making a steel furniture, I'll be more sensitive
to the price of steel. Then somebody who makes wooden furniture and
uses steel nails. Steel is still steel, but the cost of
nails as a fraction of the total cost
is much smaller for somebody who makes
wooden furniture as compared to the price of steel that goes into steel furniture. Even though we have
the same metal steel, the person who's more price sensitive to the
steel is the person who makes a steel furniture as opposed to the person who
makes wooden furniture. Now this one's not
very surprising. If somebody else is sharing
a part of the bill, you are going to be
less price sensitive. So people observe this, that if your company is
paying for your airfare, you will probably
not as search as much for a lower cost to flight. How do you tackle that? Well you may want to
give you an employee some incentive in terms of some shared benefit if they
are finding a lower price. Another example is, when you are a human pharmaceuticals
or the products that you buy in a pharmacy
when they are covered by insurance you're likely to be less
price sensitive. How do companies encouraged
people to become more price sensitive and
buy the cheapest product? If you go through the insurance company and lower the price, let's say if a drug costs a $100, insurance company pays 80
percent you pay only 20. You're going to pay 20 and the insurance
company picks up 80. If you lower the price from
100-50, what will happen? You will pay 10 instead of 20. Who's getting the
biggest advantage? It's the insurance company. But if you can give a direct
to consumer discount, then the consumer sees a bigger
benefit of that discount. So whenever you have shared
expenses and you want the consumer to actually
be more price sensitive, you give a direct to
consumer discount as opposed to lowering the
price of the product directly. You're switching costs
affects price sensitivity. So if I already have a big car, a big SUV for example I have a V8 SUV that I've
won for 10 years. It still works well
so I don't change it. Even though my kids tell
me to buy a new one. But because I already
have a big SUV, when the price of
gasoline increases, I still fill it up. I'm not very price sensitive to it even though I wanted to be, I have no choice because I
get only 15 miles per gallon. If I were able to change my car, then I would become
more price sensitive, but I'm stuck with
a particular car or a particular SUV in this case. So when the price of
gasoline changes, my behavior doesn't change I still have to go to the office every day of the week I pretty
much go six days a week. I still consume as much gasoline as I did even when
the price was lower. An area that is also
important to think about is price quality
relationships. There are many product
categories where consumers inferred the quality of the
product from the price. So for many people say perfumes
is one example of that. Let me give you
some more examples that maybe even more relevant. Consulting services,
legal services, choice of a doctor, financial advisors or
retirement planning. In all these cases, what we find is people infer quality of the
product from the price. Why is that? What's
the common driver? The common driver here
is consumers lack of knowledge about the
product or the service. I don't know who's the best legal professional because I don't use
them very often. But if I have somebody
who's really cheap, I might infer from their lower price that
they are not very good. Fair as somebody who charges a lot maybe better because why? Because if other
people are willing to pay more for them,
they must be good. I'm not very knowledgeable
about this service and if I find that the market
is willing to pay more for them, they must be good. This is consumers lack
of knowledge that drives the price quality relationship
because the cost of error is very high and
all these settings. Price quality
relationships happen in other areas too with
a very similar idea. The same wine when
price differently. People think that the wine that is more expensive is better. Again, this happens more with novice wine drinkers as opposed to knowledgeable
wine drinkers. Knowledgeable wine
drinkers will not show as much price quality
effects as novices. By the way we have seen many studies which
are brain scans, where for novice drinkers you see this effect
very strongly. Another area that affects consumers price sensitivity is their ability to carry inventory. If a consumer can buy an
advanced for future consumption, they can take advantage
of lower prices. They become more price sensitive. If a consumer is not
able to carry inventory, for example say
products like milk, fresh vegetables that you can't store them for a long time, people are less price sensitive because when the
product is on sale, you can't buy it for the
next months of consumption. Whereas for cereal and
many other products, people find that if the product is on
sale people buy a lot more of it because they can store the product for
future consumption. So these are some of the
instances where we see people becoming
more or less price sensitive based on the
scenario they face.