Along with economics
and statistics, psychologies and another
important aspect and we need to understand psychological
aspects of pricing as we make
pricing decisions. Psychologists have
studied pricing in great depth and there
are many key findings. Let's start with the first
one which is very popular. That's 9 price endings. In much of the US and many
parts of the Western world, you will see prices ending
in either a 9 or a 5. There are many experiments and studies that have been done to illustrate the effect of 9 price endings. So here is one. This is a very popular study that was done many years ago, a price of margarine
in a field experiment. The regular price of
margarine 83 cents , unit sales 2,817. Lower the price in the field
experiment to 63 cents, sales increased by a 194 percent. So a 20 cent reduction in price increase sales
by nearly 200 percent. But the next four cents
which is going from 63 to 59 increase sales by
over 400 percent. So what does this
study trying to say? The first 20 cents even
though it is larger had a much lower impact on sales
than the next four cents. But the next four
cents involves adding the price at 59 cents
which is 9 ending. So this is an example of a 9 ending being effective in
terms of increasing sales. Here's another interesting
study that has been reported in journals which
is in a catalog setting. These researchers sent out in a catalog setting
the same dress to different consumers but
it was priced differently depending on who received the product or who
received the catalog. In one case, the
price was set at $34, in the other case at $39, and in the third case at $44. What you would expect is that the sales would be
the highest at $34. Why? Because it's
the lowest price. What did this study find? That the sales were higher
at $39 as compared to $34. One would expect sales
at $39 to be higher than sales at $44 because 39 is lower. But then you would have
expected the sales to go up at 34 because 34 is lower than 39. But somehow the 9 ending
is perceived as a sale. So sales were highest at that. So these two studies
illustrate why 9 endings often lead to higher
sales than non 9 endings. It is also a case that there are many studies that have
not found this effect. But the practice continues because there is not much evidence to
change this practice. So we still continue
to use 9 endings and 5 endings especially
in the United States. Another very interesting
psychological finding when it comes to price is, we often refer to as the
Weber Fechner ''law''. I will put the word law in quotes because this is really not Newton's law or Charles law
that we see in physics. Is more of an empirical
generalization based on many studies
put together. So what did these two
researchers find? What they found was, consumers reacted
to prices more in percentage terms as
opposed to absolutes. So in simple words
what does that mean? What that means is a typical consumer
will be happy to drive five miles to save $5 on
a product costing $10. But the same consumer will
not be happy to drive the same five miles to save
$5 on a $1,000 product. Now, If a consumer rational if you are willing to
drive five miles to save five dollars it shouldn't
matter whether the product is $10 or product is $1,000. But we're really find empirically is that consumers are reacting more to a percentage price change as opposed to an
absolute price change, and you can look in
your heart whether you'll be consistent with
the consumers in this study. Will you also be driving more likely to drive
five miles to save five dollars on a $10 product versus five dollars
on a $1,000 product. My sense is most of
you will be consistent with what the subject
in this study did. Another very interesting
effect that psychologists have found and is labeled as what we call as
endowment effects. It's a big word for
something simple which is a sense of ownership increases the customer's
willingness to pay. I have often conducted this experiment in
my class many times, and it's just very simple. I asked the students a
very simple question. I put them in this hypothetical
setting that end of the course I will be
distributing mugs. To one group of
students I tell them you are fortunate
enough to get the mug. At what price will you
be willing to sell it to someone who was less
fortunate than you? To the other group I tell them you are not fortunate
you didn't get the mug. I asked each of these groups a, what will you be willing
to sell the mug at? That's the first group. The second group I asked them, at what price will you be
willing to pay for the mug? Consistently what I find is that those who were put in the hypothetical
situation that they own the mug are asking
more for the mach than those who are
willing to buy the mug. Even though both
groups are told that the list price of the mug is 750. What is also important
here is to know that neither one of them
actually has the mug. They are just made to assume that either they have the mug or don't have the mug. So endowment effects don't rely on actual ownership but a
perception of ownership. So what of the implications? The implications for this is, make consumers feel they own
the product before they buy. So if you look at
car test drives, many years ago if
you went for car, test driving a car, usually the salesperson
actually sat down with you and then was there with you all the time when you
test drove the car. These days when you
test drive a car they just take your driver's
license in many settings. Even though it's an
expensive car they let you and your spouse
drive the car on their own. You just bring it back.
They know that you have to collect your driver's
license anyway. But what's the benefit? The salesperson doesn't
have to spend time, but b most importantly is, you are in the car yourself without the
presence of anyone. It creates a sense of ownership. The belief is that if you can create a sense of ownership, people will be willing
to pay more for their car or and therefore
are more likely to buy it. Another very interesting
and powerful effect that psychologists have found is what we call as reference prices. Most of us do not look
at a price in isolation. We compare it with some
reference price we have in our mind and ask
ourselves is the price we are going to pay it today
better or worse than that some reference price
we have on our mind? Most of the time these
reference prices are based on the past history or prices. So if I've seen higher prices in the past and today I'm
seeing a lower price, I have a reference price in mind. I compare today's
price with that price. Now, how do you manipulate
reference price? One way you can manipulate
reference price or increase it is by comparing your today's
price against a list price, or oftentimes you will see in an infomercial people will
start with a very high price to create that as a
reference price and then slowly go down to
make it sound like a deal. Very interesting effect
that psychologists have found in terms of pricing is what they
call as context effects. What it really means is what is the impact of the choice set that is offered to a consumer
on their buying decisions. So look at two possible settings. We have in one setting consumers go to a store and they see
two cameras on the shelf. One priced at 169, and the other priced at 239. Think of another set of
consumers who go to a store where they see three
cameras on the shelf. One priced at 169, other at 239 which is the
same as the other consumers. But one price much
higher, say at 469. What do you observe
in these cases? What you observe in
these studies in a very robust way is that when you add the
higher priced option, consumers are more likely to gravitate towards the
intermediate option. Normally, what you
would expect is, if I added a camera
that is costing 469, much of its sales will come from the camera
that was costing 239 as opposed to the camera
that was costing 269. What do you actually find is the higher price camera draws more from the
lower price camera, and in fact oftentimes boost the sales of the
intermediate option. So in this case what
you are seeing is something that you would not expect in a pure
rational setting. But we see this many times. This is really the
foundation of what we call as companies offering good,
better, best strategy. What do we mean by
good, better, best? Instead of offering
just two versions of a product good and better, offer three versions of
the product good, better, and best and more people are likely to buy the
better version which is the middle version than the highest or
the lowest version. So if we reflect back on our module on pricing
what do we conclude? Effective pricing
captures value and leaves as little as
possible on the table. It's not that hard to get that extra one percent once we know how to do
these things better. Consumer price sensitivity is a major input into your
pricing decisions. We learnt in this module what are the drivers
of price sensitivity, and we also learned how
to actually measure price sensitivity and
price elasticity. I think it's also important
to keep in mind that consumers and not
purely rational, and incorporating
psychological effects into your pricing decisions can
also improve profitability.