In this module, we'll focus on a very important concept
called the economic value to the customer. In short we often refer
to this as EVC also, this concept can be very
useful on a number of things. One, it helps us set a price for
a new product or a new service that you are planning
to take to the market. It is also useful to identify whether or
not this new idea, new product or new service you
have is economically worthwhile. It can be used also very
effectively to decide who or which type of customers
you want to target. You may recall Professor Khan's spoke
about segmentation and targeting, and we can use economic value to
the customer to help make these decisions in a sound manner. It also helps us identify who
your true competition is and what is their relative economic power. It also is just as useful about
helping you rethink about how to price what you
already have on the market. So let's let's start with the small case
study, this is a very popular case study. It was written by me and
it's used extensively at Wharton, and it uses my own personal example. So we used to have a swimming
pool in our house and every winter I used to worry
about what to do with the pool. The pool was about 20,000 gallons and
it was in my backyard and every winter, the water would
get dirty and then next spring. I'll have to clean up the water
run the filter for many hours and I didn't like that. So, what I did was something simpler,
every fall or late fall, I used to just drain
the entire water of the pool and then refill it again in the spring. The problem with this method was that my
suburb has very strict laws regarding water disposal, so I can't just
throw the water on the street. So I have to have a township truck that
comes and takes the water away, and this township track charge is roughly $1 per
a thousand gallons of swimming pool water. And then come next spring when
I have to refill the pool, I have to get fresh water,
which I think I just put the tap on and that is about $1 for each 100 gallons. There are many times I've thought
about not refilling the pool, but if I did that my kids would never talk
to me again, so I have to refill it. I gathered many years ago that there was
a new product on the market that was very easy to use. All you do is drop the tablet
in the pool water and put your safety cover on which I had
to do anyway, whether I drained or not because if I don't have the safety cover
on my guess would fall into the pool. So the idea was to just take
the cover off next spring, and the claim from the inventor of
the new tablet was that the pool will be sparkling clear in the spring
just as it was the day I closed it. So I think the question to ask is, we have a new innovation that will
help professor Raju do is job faster, better, how much would he be willing
to pay for this little tablet? So, this is where economic value to the
customer comes in as a very handy tool. So let's look at Profesor Raju's
cost of draining the pool, so it's $1 per 1000 gallons it's
20,000 gallons, so that's $20. Then refilling the pool as $1 per
100 gallons, that's 20,000 gallons, which is $200, so
you put the two together, it's $220. Now let's let's start thinking a little
bit more about what this 220 means and what is its economic significance. If the tablet is priced more than 220 and
somebody comes to me and says, it's price is say 240,
what am I likely to say? Say most likely what I will say is
that the current method is cheaper, I am not interested in this new idea. If the product happens to be priced
at less than 220, I'll probably show some interest, but if it's priced exactly
a 220 I'm going to say in my mind. I am indifferent between the existing
technology which is throwing the water away and refilling I'll call that as
a method of working or a technology, and the new technology which
is using the tablet. So what is the meaning of
economic value to the customer? What it means is, trying to identify a
price at which the customer is indifferent between their existing
method of doing things, and the new idea that is being proposed. So as far as this tablet is concerned,
its economic value to the customer which in this case
happens to be me is exactly $220, assuming we have done
everything correctly. So what can this be used for? It can be used now for many things, it's
a useful input our pricing decisions for example, we already discussed this. This is the maximum price,
I might be willing to pay, and so this is the maximum price
the innovator of the tablet or the inventor of the tablet
will be able to charge. Now if the maximum is not good enough
to make your financials work now, we're thinking about
the inventor of the product. Then the new product you have is
probably not worth taking to market. So it helps in a go-no-go decision and we'll talk about this
quite a bit later also. Now let's think about another issue that
this can be very useful for which is, who are your best customers and
who you should target? Again, this is going back to Professor
Khan's session on segmentation and targeting. Using the analysis we just did,
can we identify who will be willing to pay more for
the new tablet based on our analysis? So when asked this question from my
students and also senior executives, the first answer I get always
is those who have bigger pools. Well, that is true if the same tablet
works for 30,000 gallons also, then the homeowner who has a 30,000
gallon pool will be willing to pay more. Assuming they are of the same type then
instead of 220 it will become 330. But then there is a next question when
it comes to segmentation and targeting, which is how will you find
out who has a bigger pool? And when I ask this question most
of my students remain silent, because pools are in the backyard and
if I am this inventor of this tablet, how would I know who has a bigger pool or
a smaller pool? Sometimes a clever student will say
professor, I can look at Google Maps and see who has a bigger pool. But at least we know it's not easy to
identify who has a bigger pool and who has a smaller pool specially
when you are new in the market. So I think it's very important to
recognize that while size of the pool is a good segmentation variable,
identifying who has a bigger pool and who has a smaller pool is very hard. So conceptually it's a good
segmentation variable but in practice it will not work as well. So now let's think of a second answer, those who live in areas where the cost of
water disposal or fresh water is high. Now that will be easier to
identify because going back to our session on segmentation, this
will be segmentation based on geography. Certain zip codes will have
a higher cost of disposal, certain zip codes may have zero cost of disposal,
so this is very easy to identify. So now we can now segment
customers based on geography, based on the cost of water disposal or
the cost of fresh water. So it gives us an idea as to
how to segment the market, and then also decide who to target. There is another possible answer that
I often get when asked this question, and and students will often say professor. Why don't we talk at those who
are more environmentally conscious? So my response always is, how do we define
who's more environmentally conscious? And and the economist answer to that is,
for those whom the market price of resources does not truly
reflect their societal costs. People who are environmentally conscious,
that's a very nice and a sextant definition. But then I ask my students, how would you
know who's more environmentally conscious and who's less environmentally conscious? Do environmentally conscious people
live in certain types of homes, do they wear a green t-shirt? And and usually the response is professor,
yeah, it's a good idea to go after environmentally conscious people, but
it's very hard to identify who's who. So in summary the computation of
EVC also gives us some insights into how to segment the market and
who to target, and these are all key decisions in
developing a good go-to-market plan. Another area that we can focus on in this
very domain is, trying to combine what Professor Fader talked about which
is customer lifetime value, and the concept that we discussed just now
which is economic value to the customer. Let's think of the following
two by two table, you can have customers who have a low CLV,
professor Fela talked about some of those. And customers who have a high CLB and
he talked about some of those also. Now we just learned this concept economic
value to the customer, some customers may value the tablet higher,
some customers may value the tablet lower. So now we have this 2 by 2 gives
us four possible scenarios, so let's identify these scenarios and
see their managerial usefulness. I think the obvious one is the ones in
the low low box, the lower box is these people are not interested in us,
why they are not interested in us? Because they don't value our product, and
they're also not interesting to us, why? Because they have a low customer lifetime
value, these maybe people who use the tablet once every five years,
they also don't value the tablet. So these are obviously
customers we will not target, now look at the bottom right box. These are the people who are interested
in us and also interesting to us, why are they interested in us? Because they have a high economic value to
the customer, they value our product and services, higher and
why are they interesting to us? Because their customer lifetime value
is higher, these will be obviously the segment's to go after this will
be the best segment to target. But now let's look at
the two cross diagonal boxes. Low customer lifetime value, but
high customer economic value, these people are interested in us. But costly to deal with,
why are they costly to deal with? Because they have a very low
customer lifetime value, they probably don't buy as frequently,
they ask a lot of questions, they need a lot of help, but
they do value our products. So their economic value to
the customer is high, but the CLV is low, and
then look at the lower left side. The lower left side is interesting but
not interested in us, why are they interesting? Because they have a high
customer lifetime value, and why are they not interested in us? Because they don't value our product
maybe they have smaller pools, or they'd rather do their work themselves. So I think this combining of
customer lifetime value concept that Professor Fader described
very vividly and very nicely. Combine that with this concept of economic
value to the customer that we just discussed, I think you
put these two together. It gives you a very deep insights
into your customer base of the types that we typically don't think about, which is two variables,
interested in us or interesting to us. And when you combine these two, I think it really gives you deep
insights about your customer base. And we use this extensively in deciding
which customer groups to target and which ones not to target. Now, let's ask another question,
what else can we use EVC or economic value to the customer for? We can also use it to identify
who our true competition is and what their response might be
when we launch a new idea. So, let's say we are thinking of
the person who invented this tablet and you ask the question,
who will this person compete with? And the typical answer you will get is,
other people who make such tablets or those who might make such
tablets in the future. That's a good answer, but
I don't think it's a great answer, I think we can do better. And a better answer begins by
redefining what is competition, a broader in my view if not a better
view of defining competition is, who all will suffer if we succeed? So let's think about that,
if our new tablet becomes successful and people like professor Raju start
to use it, who will lose business? Well the first person who lose business
is companies that take the water away companies that haul the water away, why? Because now people like Professor Raju
will not have companies haul the water away because they all
they do is put the little tablet. Water companies that supplies water
will also have low business because now their billings will go down. So whenever we take
a new idea to market or a new product to market,
value shifts from one industry to another. And the concept of economic value
to the customer helps us identify where will the y-value migrated from? It's not about one tablet
competing against another tablet, it's the launch our tablet takes money
out of certain other industries. And once we identify where
the value is going to migrate from, we know they are going to respond in
some way to prevent that from happening. So we can expect some response for
those who lose if we win, and this I believe gives us a broader
understanding of who our competitors are. These are people who lose when we win,
again economic value to the customer gives us some insights
into their value gets migrated from. We talked a little bit about making
go-no-go decisions using economic value to the customer, so let's get back to
that in a little bit more detail. We can define the value of an idea by
estimating the value it creates for the company. Let's assume for the moment that
all customers are exactly like me, then each will be willing to pay
a maximum of $220 for the tablet. If we were told that the cost
of the making this tablet is $240 per tablet, and
you put 220 next to 240. It's not rocket science to conclude
that this is not a very useful idea, because it costs two and
forty dollars to make but the maximum that a customer is
going to be willing to pay is $220. But what if we were informed that the cost
of making this tablet is only $20? Then the company has created or the innovator has created a value
which is $200, which is 220 minus 20. Now, this is the value we
can now put to work, and more on this as we go forward in
terms of improving pricing decisions. So, let's say the economic
value as we computed is 220, the cost is 20 in this chart, I have drawn to 20 at the top and
20 at the bottom. And let's say we are hypothesizing
a price of $100, if you are hypothesizing
a price of $100 and we put a hundred on this chart,
what inside does it give us? Well, it tells us that we are giving
the customer $120 incentive to switch from whatever they are doing
today to this new method of working, and the inventor of the tablet
is going to get a margin of $80. Where am I getting $80 from? It's 100 minus 20, and
where am I getting 120 from? It's 220 minus 100 remember
professor Raju it costed him $220 to keep the pool
fresh by spraying. Now if the price of the tablet
is 100 he's going to save $120, now if we shift the price higher or lower, let's say we increase the price 140,
what are we really doing? What we are doing is balancing
the incentive given to the customer against the margin for
the inventor of the product. So in this particular framework,
price comes a sharing rule, a rule by which we decide how much of
the created value is shared between the inventor and the customer. And it's a very useful way of thinking
about making good pricing decisions. We could now bring our channel
partner in the analysis, the inventor of the tablet is not going to
go to people I professor Raju directly but maybe go through a store
a swimming pool store. Then we have to keep
their interest in mind, let's say we charge a price of
$70 to our channel partner. And the general partner then charges
a price of $100 to the end user. The channel partner is going to make $30, is the $30 margin per tablet good
enough for the channel partner? Well, how will we answer that question,
what are his or her other alternatives? What can he sell that will give
him $30 maybe more than that? If there are many things that
he can sell that will give more than $30 then $30 is not enough. But it helps us identify each
person's incentives, and then the next question we ask ourselves
is, have we created enough value. Or has the innovation created enough
value to keep all three parties happy? Our channel partner our end user would
they be interested in switching to us? And also ourselves,
is it enough of a margin to us? If the difference between the cost and
the EVC is not very high, then it's unlikely that all three
parties are likely to be happy, and the innovation is not likely to succeed. So in summary, what do we learn from
economic value to the customer, and what can it be used for? First, it helps us set a price for
a new product or service that you're planning to
take to the market, number two and equally important decision, if not more
important is who you should target. Remember professor Khan spoke about
segmentation and targeting, we can use EVC to actually bring that to life and help us
make these decisions in a sound manner. It also helps us identify who your true
competition is and their economic power, and then correspondingly whether the new
idea you have is economically worthwhile. Do you have enough for
our channel partners? That's another area that this concept
can help us answer a few questions. And the analysis here is useful whether
you are thinking of taking a new idea to market. And in my view, it's equally useful
when you already have a product or a service on the market, and you want to rethink about how to price
what you already have there in the market.