In this lecture, we will
talk about creating customer access for our products and services that we've developed. When we develop or
go to market plan, there are four areas where we
need to make key decisions. What will our product
and service look like? What features and
benefits it will have? How will we price it? How will we promote it through advertising and price discounts? Then finally, place. What we mean by place broadly speaking is making
sure your product or service is accessible to the customer at the right place, at the right time, and of
the right type and quantity. In old school marketing, this was referred to as distribution channels
or just channels. Why is this important? By this time, you know how
to understand your customer, develop a great
product or service based on that customer input, created a great brand as
Professor Con spoke about, and communicated the value through your
advertising campaign, and even priced it appropriately. But what if your customers
are not able to find it? All that you've done
may not matter. Many times a customer's
decision on what product to buy is also based on
their experience in the store at the
point of purchase, whether it's a
bricks-and-mortar store or an online store. It's also important
to recognize that most businesses often spend significantly more
money on creating appropriate customer access
for their product or service, than they spend on
advertising or promotions. In many cases, it's been studied
extensively that you are spending three to four times as much on creating customer
access. So it's expensive. Some companies are spending
40 to 50 percent of their revenues on
creating customer access. What's interesting is
that most companies don't even know the cost
of it because it does not show up on
your income statement. Think of a company like Unilever. Your revenues are
recognized based on how much you sell to
your distributors, and the distributors then sell the product to the end user. What you recognize is
the price at which you sell to your channel partner
or your distributor. The difference is what
they charge the end-user. So if you think of as
standard department store, they make 50 percent margin. It means you are
getting half of what the customer is paying
for your product. Just think about that, how expensive that is, and it is not even showing up on your income statement
because it's really you not recognizing that channel margin because that's from
the income statement of the channel partner. How we create customer access or what we call
traditionally creating a distribution channel can also be a great source of
competitive advantage, and a disruptor in
the marketplace. Many businesses have
been disrupted, many industries have been disrupted merely because somebody else came up with a better
distribution channel to access the customer. If we look at this
concept of disruption, and especially if
you look at retail, and you look around us, there are so many changes
that are happening. In 2017, for which
we have some data, nearly 9000 bricks-and-mortar
stores closed in the US. Toys-R-Us is out of business, Circuit City is gone. Well-known department stores
that many of us love, such as Filene's Hecht's, Mervyn's Marshall
Fields are all gone. Rite Aid closed 600 stores, Sports Authority: 460 stores. Even companies like Walmart
are closing stores. Macy's is closing a 100 stores. But when you also compare
it with other things, Warby Parker, an
eyeglass retailer has opened approximately
100 retail locations. Caspar, that we'll talk
about in more detail later, is opening 200 stores. Amazon, the big killer of bricks and mortar retail just bought Whole Foods for 13.4 billion, and bought their
bricks-and-mortar stores and will plan to continue them, and use them to the best
of their capability. So I think all this makes us wonder that if online
is the place to be, why are companies
opening physical stores? What's really going on? How do we make sense of
what is happening here? Let's also not forget
that some of those being disrupted today were
actually the disruptors. You can go back to the
1980s and late 1980s, when Toys-R-Us, Circuit City, and Sports Authority, who are once deemed as category killers, they were the
innovators of the day. Department stores were an
innovation that went on to change the very face of detail and how customers
bought products and services. Harding and Howell to the best of my knowledge in 1796 in London, was the very first
department store. Macy's opened in
1878 in New York, and Selfridges opened
in 1909 in London. These were the innovators of the day and disruptors
of their times, and some are still around. In order to understand all this, I think we need to get to basics and start with foundations of how we understand
distribution channels and creating customer access. So let me start by giving
what often people call as an old-school tutorial on channels that is still
just as relevant. In order for any of us to
buy a product or a service, two things are important. We need to have access to: one is what we call as
relevant information needed to make the purchase, and we'll talk more
about this in a minute. The second is, I should
be able to execute my purchase through
the right logistics. Now, the scale of the provider
and the importance to the buyer of information
logistics drives optimal channels structure. So let's think through
this a little bit more. What do we mean by information? What do we mean by logistics? So let's think about information. First piece of information
I need to know is, why should I buy this
product or service? Why should I pay so
much for a new idea? How will it work?
How will I use it? We call this primary information. Then, there is what we call
as comparative information. Why should I buy from you
and not someone else? That is comparative information. Every customer needs
this in order to decide whether or not to buy
a new product or a service. The second part is logistics. There are many
components of logistics. Convenience and accessibility, how far will I have
to travel to buy it? I'm hungry now. Or I need diapers
for my young child. How much will I have to
travel to get those? Will I have to buy
24 bottles of wine a day vitamins with each
having a 120 capsules? Can I buy just one, instead of having to buy so many? How long will it take
for me to get it? Time between order and receipt
of goods is important. Who will I go to
if the snow blower I just bought doesn't work? Who will ask if I have
a problem in assembly? A part is missing or broken, where will I get it from? All this falls under logistics. So we can see a consumer when they are making
a decision to buy a product or a service, they need to have
information about its value, its price, how it works, but also needs to make sure that the product is accessible
at the right time, at the right place, in the right quantity,
and of the right type. Now how do we put
together all of this in a reasonable easy to
understand framework? It requires making a few sort of starting
assumptions as we call it. Traditionally, one can start by assuming that a manufacturer, somebody let's say
who makes shoes, say Nike, is in a better position to provide information about their shoe. Why is this shoe more
interesting than another shoe, but intermediaries say as a retailer of a shoe is probably better at
providing logistics. Now these are starting
assumptions and over time these
assumptions change, and with that frameworks
will also change. Now different products and services may have
different levels of information requirements
and logistic requirements. Some are high, low on both sides. So for example, if a
hospital is purchasing a radically new equipment
for say proton therapy, they require a lot of
information on whether to buy, which one to buy, but the lead for logistics is low because they're going to buy
it once and never again. It's not like they're
going to buy this every day, every month. So the product has to be available to them
at the right time. It's a one-time purchase. On the other hand, if the same
hospital is going to adopt a new drug that will be used
extensively in the hospital, say it's an antibiotic that'll
be used extensively for many patients at many
different times, then the need for
information is high. Why should they adopt
this new antibiotic, but also they are
going to have to purchase that
extensively, repeatedly. So the need for
logistics is also high. Think of another situation, where either us as
the warden school or a hospital is going to replace table lamps that are
sitting on our desk. Well, table lamps are not
that complex of product so we are going to buy it
maybe once every few years. So the need for information
is also low and the need for logistics is also low because it's
infrequently purchased. On the other hand, think of buying surgical supply for a hospital which is
used extensively, but I bought it
many times before. So I really need to
know too much about it, because I have already
purchased it before, but I need to make
sure it comes to me at the right place
at the right time. So I'm not out of stock. So in this case, the need
for information is low, but need for logistics is high. Now depending on
various combination, we can set up different types of customer access structures. So for example, if the
need for information is high and the need for
logistics is low, it's a one-time purchase, we can go direct to the customer. That's what happens
most of the time is these companies have
their own sales people, they go have interactions
with the hospitals, and then they directly
install the equipment. On the other hand,
if it's a new drug that is going to be adopted by a hospital or a
set of physicians, then of course the pharmaceutical companies
sales-reps will go, convince the doctor
in the hospital why this drug makes sense, why it should be adopted, but then the hospital does not buy the drug directly from the
pharmaceutical company. There are many intermediaries
who will do that for us. So we'll call that
system a pull system. Why do we call it pull? Because the job of the company is to actually create the
demand for the product, and then the product
is then purchased from ancillaries and wholesalers. So this is a framework
that we often use to design what we call a structured customer access
or channel design decisions. Now this is the traditional
view of thinking. What has happened over time,
is something different. But let's first focus on this to understand how disruptions can happen within this framework. So what this framework argues for is that a particular
product or a service, the nature of the product
or the service determines whether you need high
logistics or low logistics, or high information
or low information. Once you have that, then a disruption occurs by
reallocation of function. So I'll just give one example. Furniture is a complex product. We buy it once in a while. It requires high level of information and also
high level of logistics. But what did IKEA do. What IKEA said was, "You can come to IKEA and
pick up the furniture, but you will install it yourself, you will assemble it yourself." So they outsource the assembly and installation to the end user. That does not mean that installation and assembly
was no longer needed. People often think of disintermediation as saying
something is not needed. The delivery and installation and assembly was still
needed in a furniture, is just that who did it changed. Earlier a furniture company
did everything themselves, now IKEA outsourced it to us. In the process, we paid
less for the furniture. Why? Because we are doing part
of the activity ourselves. So in sum is, logistics
was spun off to us partly. Not everything, but partly to us, and so IKEA was able to sell the furniture at a
lower price to us. You can look at the other side. Apple. Apple stores now have consultative selling
in-house or online, instead of relying on
value-added resellers. So what Apple did was
actually bring in some of the activities that the
value-added resellers did in their own house, and in the process change
that business model. So I think what this framework
says is disruptions can happen through re-allocation
of activities or functions,, but activities or
functions do not go away. Then the channel margin should be a function of what
activities is being done. If a channel partner does more, then you have to pay them more. If you are doing more, then you can pay them less. Now in today's world, when we step back a little bit, there are other disruptions
that are possible. One of the key disrupters
here is technology. So let me think about technology a little bit more broadly than we
typically think about. When typically we
think about technology in retail and
distribution channels, we think of online buying. That we can order
something online. But technology is much
bigger than that. The impact on customer
access is far deeper. Let's think of three industries; books, music, and
let's say money. I asked my students which of these three industries has been most disrupted
by technology? The typical answer
I get is books. Amazon started as a bookseller, but now it's much bigger and
books have been disrupted. But oftentimes that's
not the right answer. First of all, why have
these three industries been disrupted the most? It's not because we
can buy books online. It's really because today all these three products
mature earlier hard goods. By hard goods I mean, book is a hard good, it's a physical product, has been converted
to a soft good. What do we mean by a soft good? Book is now a soft product. You can download it
on your computer, or on your on your iPad
or on your Kindle. Think about what music
was many years ago. If you were rich enough, you were a king or a queen, the musician came and
played music for you and, all the poor people may
be sat on the side and if the wind blew in their direction they could hear the music. But then, music gets
codified into a tape then it gets codified into a record or some of you may still
remember seeing a record. They are coming back because they apparently have
still better quality. Then it went from a
record to a tape, sorry a CD, and
now what is music? Music is basically
bits and bytes. Now it's become a soft good. Money at one in time was gold, then we got paper, then from paper we
went to plastic, and now what is money? Most people say
it's just a number. It's sitting in your account and sometimes you know it
and sometimes you don't. So what technology has done in all these three industries, is convert a hard
good to a soft good. When a product changes from being a hard good to a soft good, that's when disruption happens. In my view, the biggest
disruption has been for money. Money today is transacted very differently than money used to be transacted many years ago. If you think of books, still many many people
read regular books. They prefer to eat regular books. Very few people
want to have cash. Many countries have
gone cashless. Many industries are
trying to go cashless. So this is an example of disruption of technology where hard good got converted
into a soft good. So the answer is really not
the method of purchase, it's not online versus
bricks and mortar, it's the product itself. What else we can ask ourselves can change from a hard
good to a soft good? What will the world look
like 10 years from now? What will in-home 3D printing
do 10 years from now? Will we be able to
print a shoe at home? How about a new car? I think that world
is not too far. People are arguing that
within the next 20 years, many products that are, what we consider as hard
goods today will become soft goods that people
will be able to just print at home with the
additive manufacturing. I can only visualize what customer access will
look like when that happens. So I think it's really
important to understand the role of technology in this area more broadly than just online versus
bricks and mortar.