In the previous lecture, we talked
about how technology disrupted money, books, and music mainly by changing
a hard good into a soft good, and in that in that way
changing the logistics. Now, let's talk a little bit about
how disruption happens in information delivery. If we think about our day-to-day
purchases, every product or service that we buy is a bundle
of attributes or benefits. Some of these benefits researchers
have called as digital attributes or digital benefits and others have been
classified as non digital attributes. So what do we mean by digital and
non-digital attributes? Think about Professor Raju
buying a new iPhone. There are so many digital attributes,
the price of the product, the warranty, the screen size. I can go to the website and
see what the size of the screen is, how long is the warranty? What's the price of the product? We'll will call all these
digital attributes. Then there are non digital attributes,
the feel and touch of the screen, the real brightness of the colors, the speed
with which one can open or close apps. So the non-digital attributes, you can see are little bit
different than digital attributes. Digital attributes are easy to
convey using online channel or even catalogs in old days. For non-digital attributes, the customer
prefers to touch and feel the product. Now some products are predominantly
consisting of digital attributes say a printer cartridge from a well-known
company, an accessory for my iPhone. A book whose abstract I can read online or
a pair of socks that I purchased before. And I'm sure you can come up with
many more examples like that. And there are other products that are
mostly non-digital, a new jacket that you are planning to buy, a pair of running
shoes that you're going to spend a lot of time running and you're worried about
how they're going to affect your knees. Your choice of a channel can depend on
whether the product has mostly digital or non-digital attributes. For non digital product
experience's important, so there is a need for bricks-and-mortar like
trying a new pair of basketball shoes. Go look at the Nike store these days,
see how an outdoor grill actually works as opposed to claiming that it
will cook burgers very nicely. Sleep on a mattress for at least 15
minutes as Consumer Reports recommends. Depending on your product and
service whether it has more digital or non-digital attributes. You can think of whether you
should use online channel or a bricks-and-mortar channel. But here again, there is creativity,
that's important. There are creative solutions that
companies have used to manage non-digital attributes in an online world. So let's look at an example
of Warby Parker, a company started by Wharton
students a few years ago. This industry is very large,
over $60 billion and the margins in this industry
were extremely high. There are different types of providers,
people who provide only glasses, people who provide fashion guards,
people who have insurance, or have retail stores, all these fell
under one group called Luxottica. They owned everything, therefore they
were able to command high premiums, high price cost margins. So Warby Parker comes out and
says we we'll offer IVL online. Now what's the problem with IVL online? Most of us who wear a pair of
glasses want to try it out. Now these people can't afford to open
retail stores at the time they started, so how did they beat the non-digital
attribute tissue? They said why don't you try these at home? So what did they do? They said you can try five pairs at home,
depending on whether you like or not, you can keep one,
send the others back. So what they are trying to do is
using their online world, but yet offer the customer an ability to try
the product through in-home experience. So they started with that but now more
recently they've opened their own stores. In fact, I refer to this earlier,
they have opened over 100 stores. But this is one way of making
sure that a company predominantly in online world takes care of
the non-digital attributes of the product. Mattress industry is another example, it's a very large market
dominated by two major companies. The very little growth in the industry,
people don't replace their mattresses that often, it's driven
primarily by new home formation. The adoption online was very limited, because it's an unpleasant
shopping experience. But more importantly,
you don't want to buy a mattress online, because you can't experience whether
it's going to be hard or soft or medium. You need to actually go sleep on it,
that's what Consumer Reports suggest is at least spend 15 minutes
sleeping on the mattress. In fact, we are in the process of buying
a new mattress, I read Consumer Reports, it strongly recommended me to go to
the store and sleep on the mattress for 15 minutes on each side,
one side, other side on the back. Now, that's that's an example of a product
with very high non-digital attributes. So what did Casper.com do? Well, it's a online retail store, but they
let you try at home for close to 100 days. What that does is it removes the anxiety, it creates a product which
has non-digital attributes. You don't deny it, you don't fight it, you
say to the customer, okay, you try it if you don't like it we'll actually go pick
it up, you don't have to send it back. It started in 2013 and
it's now valued at 750 million. As we look at other opportunities in
retail, it's important to understand the effect of repeat purchase on
digital and non-digital attributes. Repeat purchase reduces the weight
a customer puts on non-digital attributes. Once you purchase the product,
next time in many cases the touch and feel becomes less critical,
because you already know. So think about socks, when I'm buying
a pair of socks the first time from a new company,
I want to get a sense of how they are, whether they will stay up or
they fall down. But once I purchase them
then I know how they feel, so I can always repeat buy
the socks from online retailer. So there are opportunities
online in products that are primarily purchased again,
and again. Think about flowers, can there be
a product that is more touch and feel than flowers? But yet we buy flowers online, why? Because we know that once we bought it
from flowers.com or one of these stores, we know what kind of
products they deliver and then we are comfortable
sending them again. We know what kind of flowers
they send even though ideally, I would like to go and touch and feel
these flowers is really not worthwhile, because I'm sending them again, and again.