In this lecture, we'll focus on a very important concept called managing channel conflict. Anytime you have a
partner who helps take your products or service to the market to the consumer, there are opportunities
for conflict. It's good to understand when this conflict occurs and
how you can mitigate it. There are two types of
conflict that are possible. The first one is between us
and our channel partners. We often refer to that as vertical conflict
and the second is a possible conflict amongst our various channel partners that then perturbs the
channel as a whole. So think of vertical conflict. Some years ago, Costco decided not to carry
Coca-Cola in its stores. That's a conflict
between Coca-Cola, the company, and
Costco; its retailer. Horizontal conflict comes in different shapes and
sizes but broadly speaking a dominant form of horizontal conflict
that we need to think about is what we
call as free riding. This is problems amongst
your channel partners. Typically, free riding
occurs when a low service, low-price retailer
hurts a high service, high price retailer. So a consumer can go to a high service,
high price retailer. They are higher
price because they provide the higher service. Get educated about the product, get all the information
about the product, and then go to a low service
store to buy the product. A typical example of that
we refer to as showrooming. So Best Buy for example, argued that they were
the showroom for Amazon. So people came to Best Buy. They studied all these
high-end televisions, see how the picture
was or amplifiers and had other audio equipment. They experienced it there, understood what
they were going to buy but then click the button, went to Amazon and
purchase it from there. Amazon responded back by coming up with the concept of
what we call as webrooming, which is I have so
much information on the web about various
products and services. People come to the website, look at these products, try to understand them, compare them with other products. We have comparison engines but then because they
need it tomorrow, they go to the other
store and then buy it right away and take it home because they want to
watch the Superbowl the very next day and we can't
deliver the next day, at least at that
time they couldn't. So I think these
are both examples of what we call as
horizontal conflict, either showrooming or webrooming. How do we manage such conflict? I think the first thing
for all of us to do is to understand what are the
underlying drivers of conflict. The best way to
manage conflict in my view is through good
design of the channel. Be clear on who will do what. Whose job is it to
provide information? Whose job is it to
provide logistics? Then what is the
appropriate compensation for their activities? Also, put up right away and upfront what actions will be taken when infringement occurs. Eliminating conflict
is not the goal, managing it so that it's
healthy and not disruptive is a more reasonable objective
in channel management.