In this lecture, we'll talk about online retailing and e-commerce. An area that has been growing
rapidly over the years. Let's start by
looking at some data. If we look at global
e-commerce sales, they've been growing since 2014. These data show started
at 5.9 percent of total retail sales globally
and in 2018 it's 8.8 percent. By many estimates actually, this is an underestimate
of the activity. But some other estimates is
as high as 10 percent of all global sales are
now e-commerce sales. By the way this does not
include transactions overall, for example banking transactions, or airline ticket transactions. This is what we will call
as regular retail sales. If we look across countries you see some interesting differences. Let's focus on China, where 16.6 percent of
total retail sales are online compare that
with the US which is 8.9 percent in 2018. So China has in terms of percentage of sales
that have gone online, is much higher than the US. In fact, I was in China
just a few days ago. It is very hard to actually
make payments by cash, all payments have
moved online and much of the store sales
have also moved online. What is interesting also is
that UK is as high as China, or in fact even higher than China when it comes
to retail sales. So understanding these
differences across countries is interesting
and important. Our focus today is going to be predominantly on what's
going on in the US. If we look at how frequently
people shop online, you'll see some
interesting differences. Now please note that
these data look at, given that people shop online, how frequently they shop. So when you look at men, 30 percent of men shopping
is at least once a week online and shop once a week
per month is 32 percent, at least once a year 38 percent. On the women side, it is little bit less when it comes to frequency
of shopping online. If you add these
numbers in any row together you'll
get a 100 percent. These data are not saying
who shops more often. It's saying given that
this shop online, how frequently those
who shop once a week, versus once per month,
or once a year. If you look at
differences across ages, it's not surprising that younger people are more
frequent shoppers. But that is not to say that older people do not shop online. Even those who are
65-plus at least make one purchase every year, 58 percent of them make one
purchase every year online. So what this all
indicates is that, online shopping is now
become common place. It's not just for a few people, but more people are
buying products online. You look at a little bit more in terms of how they buy online, and this gives some
interesting ideas on what's going on
behind the scenes. If you look at traffic, percentage of traffic on the PC, is e-commerce traffic
is about 54 percent. But if you look at
percentage of sales, it's close to 77 percent.
What does that mean? It means more percentage
conversions happened on the PC on smartphone it's 33.7 percent e-commerce traffic, but only 10.7 percent
retail sales. What that means is people are
browsing on the smartphone, but when it comes to buying they probably shift to the PC. Same way for tablet. It's about the same. So tablet is somewhere in between the PC and the smartphone
as we would expected. So again PC is the dominant conversion channel when it comes to actually
buying the product. But yes, smartphone
is more for browsing. But these numbers are likely to change as smartphones
become better, as we become more used to
buying on the smartphone. But this is where
it stands today. Now let's ask a broader question, which is, Why is this
trend happening? Why are we shifting more
towards e-commerce? There are many reasons for that. It's convenience, it's ease, It could be some people
say it's lower prices. But let's go a little deeper
and try to understand why we are all shifting
towards online purchases. Anyone of us when we are
buying a new product, our first task is to get more information
about the product. So in marketing terms we think of each product as a bundle of attributes benefits or features. So think of a notebook computer. A notebook computer has
features such as screen size, its memory, whether it has a touch screen or
not and whether, you know what's the
feel of the keyboard is it soft, is it hard, those are the kinds
of features or benefits we are looking
at a notebook computer. We can classify these
attributes into two types. Let's say screen size and memory, we'll call them
digital attributes. Why would we call them
digital attributes? Because these are just numbers. We can actually just get as much of a sense
of this by looking at online website or looking
at actually go into a store. But there are
non-digital attributes such as feel of the keyboard, or the feel of the mouse pad. We'll call these
non-digital attributes. Now if you look across products, some products are predominantly consisting of digital attributes, and the other products consists of non-digital attributes. So let's look at some examples. US open is going on, and tennis balls some
of well-known brand. I would say are mostly
digital attributes. I know what it is, whether it's hard or soft, the brand is there,
I've known it. So I know, I don't
need to go open the box and feel that tennis balls to find
out what they are. But then compare that with a car. We are thinking of
buying a new car. We look at all the
features engine size, car size on the web, but both my wife and I
would like to actually go and test drive the
car before we buy it, because you want to
get a better sense of the feel of the car. How comfortable are the seats. When I put my foot down
does the car move or not? Is it smooth? All those are
non-digital attributes. Products that are predominantly
digital attributes can be purchased via the
internet more easily. So these products can more
easily shift to online sales. Products that have more
non-digital attributes, I would say less so, because the consumer
has to touch and feel the product to get as field, get a sense of the product. So I'd like to test drive
a car before buying. I'd like to try a pair
of shoes before I buy, even though I know what
the size of the shoe is. So those are kinds of the
products examples where I would like to actually
touch the product, feel the product before I buy. Now let's superimpose on this
another important aspect, and that's the aspect
of repeat purchase. If I bought a product before, some of the
non-digital attributes get converted to
digital attributes. So let's look at another example. Once I bought a pair of socks of a particular brand and
tried them on and use them. I know what they feel like. First time when I bought them, I didn't know what
they feel like, whether there's soft or rough, weather they stretch
nicely or not, whether they fitted on my forte. But once I've tried
them I've used them for a month or so and I
need to buy them again, I can reorder them online. Why? Because all the
non-digital attributes get converted to
digital attributes, once I've tried the product
or once I bought it. So in the next purchase will be similar to what I bought before. The same may be true of a shirt. I usually wear a blue shirt, I buy it from the same company. First time when I tried this, I had to go to the store to
see the fit of the shirt. But from this point on wards, I just order it online. Why because I know
exactly what it feels like and how that
particular size fits me. So the first purchase
is made in a bricks and mortar store and then
repurchase goes online. If you really think about this whole process of digital
and non-digital attributes, and how not digital
attributes over time gets converted to
digital attributes, is a major driver of increase in e-commerce
sales over time. Because many of the products
we buy again and again. First time we can buy at
bricks and mortar store, when we buy the
same product again, the non-digital attributes become digital attributes and we are very comfortable
buying them online. This particular
phenomenon is giving a dramatic boosts to
online sales over time, no matter which
country we live in, whether we're male or female, no matter how old we are. Let's now talk a little bit about competition between online
and offline retail. This is an interesting topic, and anyone who's
starting an online store or an offline store needs
to keep this in mind. Consumers can shop offline to
get a feel for the product, look at all the digital and
non-digital attributes, and then often go buy
online at a cheaper price. This phenomenon is referred
to as show-rooming, and I've studied this quite
deeply in my research. One way to minimize
show-rooming is to price match, the other way is to offer a unique selection in your offline bricks
and mortar store. Best buy at one time was very concerned
about show-rooming, but tackled it by improving
its own online store. Look at the reverse pattern, and this is what Amazon
often complaints about. Consumers can search
online and buy offline. This is referred
to as webrooming. How does a company like Amazon
take care of webrooming? Well, they can improve
the speed of delivery, they can improve the
cost of delivery, or reduce the cost of
delivery, or bundled delivery, or have better return policies, or a larger assortment that can help against
webrooming because people who will be worried whether they go to
the offline store, whether the product will
be in stock or not. So I think both offline
and online stores have to worry about not just competition
between online stores, but between online and offline also through the process of
show-rooming and webrooming, and there are ways
to tackle both. I think what we are
leading towards these days is what we call
as omni-channel retail. Many online retailer
are setting up Physical bricks and mortar stores where people can buy the product. Warby Parker is a good
example and there are several online mortar
stores that are also opening offline stores. Many offline stores have
already set up online stores, we talked about Best buy earlier. Walmart and Macy's are
other good examples. Having both online and
bricks and mortar presence, creates what we call
as multiple channels. Some consumers may have
preferences for one channel, other may have preference
for another channel. No matter which channel
you have a preference for, we have both channels. This is called
multichannel retailing. The difference
between multi-channel and omni-channel retailing is how well a particular brand
aligns the two channels. So brands such as Starbucks
have created what we call as integrated
multi-channel experiences, resulting in
omni-channel retailing. A customer can order
offline and by online, or customer can order
online and buy offline, and the two channels
are well integrated. As we go forward omni-channel retailing
is no longer an option, but is becoming a
necessity for success, both for online commerce as well as bricks
and mortar commerce.