In summary, creating
the right customer access for your product or service is extremely important. You may have a great product, you may have developed a
great advertising campaign, have a great brand,
priced it right, but if customers
do not know where to buy it, when to buy it, and as product is available
in a convenient way, nothing will happen, it'll just sit and they'll be
no positive results. So please make sure you do this appropriately carefully based
on what we have learned. It's also an area where companies have to spend quite
a bit of money. Thirty to 40 percent of the price is often
captured by the channel, whereas the company spends no more than 10 percent of
their budget on advertising. It's also a more
permanent decision. We can change our advertising
campaigns but changing channels of distribution
is not that easy. It has to be thought
through very carefully. It's also an opportunity for
innovation and disruption. Many new ideas and businesses
have been created, but disrupting existing
channels of distribution. So please do keep in mind how will you reach your customer. Make sure they get
the right information and the logistics they need, allocate your functions
thoughtfully. What will you do? What will your
channel partner do? Who will get what? Is easier compensation
mechanism consistent with the activities that
you assigned to yourself and to your
channel partner? Also, anticipate conflict. It's better to anticipate
conflict and handle it in the design stage as opposed
to having to manage it later. I always end this
session by showing these four examples
to my students and I asked them what is common across all these four examples and
I get different answers. But the right answer here is all these four businesses
were started by Wharton students and
they were innovators and disruptors and some continue to disrupt the industry
that they are in. It was a great way
to make money for all these Wharton students
and I think innovations and disruptions in this area are a great way to make money for many entrepreneurs like
yourself and business people.